# Lab Report: MEMORY

#### David Polansky

## Process Description

> You should begin with _1-2 paragraphs_ outlining precisely what you did in the lab activity. While much in these paragraphs will repeat between students, it is worthwhile to write out your experience, both to help you remember what you did and because your experiences—and what you take away or emphasize—will differ in subtle but important ways from your classmates. Most of our experiential activities will include specific outcomes. You might produce a specific material product, such as a letterpress printed sheet, or be asked to adapt code we went over together to answer a new question. The first task of any lab report, then, will be to demonstrate completion of these tasks.

We played through a Twine interpretation of Moby Dick's first chapter. It had the same text as the chapter, but made you click links to reveal text and to travel between different sections. We looked at the Twine code, which revealed that double brackets were links, and variables could be set. (Looking at the wiki, it appears that Twine has a lot of other built-in functionality, plus the ability to add functionality with JavaScript.) Then, we were let loose to experiment with making a Twine game ourselves. (I spent almost all of my time writing text for a Twine story rather than really exploring the interface.) At home, I played the linked game "With Those We Love Alive".

## Observations

> In the next section of each report, you should in **2-3 paragraphs** move from a literal description of what you did in the lab to a more conceptual set of observations. In brief, you want to home in on those aspects of the lab that raised questions or prompted new insights into the textual technology we investigated in the lab activity. What new ideas occurred to you while working? What surprised, delighted, or frustrated you?

I was familiar with text-based CYOA games previous to the lab, but didn't know that there was a dedicated API - I just assumed people made them with Python or something similar. The API definitely makes some things easier - particulary, viewing the overall "map" of the story, adding new passages, and probably integration with CSS (I don't know CSS, so I can't say for sure) - but basic programming language things like variables, conditionals, etc. are a little bit harder to do, since there seems to be a lot of weird syntax that separates it from normal text (<< >>) and things like endifs that I generally just find annoying.

"With Those We Love Alive" doesn't have images like the Ishmael passage, but it has some other bells and whistles - changing background image and background music, purple statements that could be switched between a few different options, and a seemingly-more-complex narrative "map". The first two add to the experience: the background changes the mood, the purple statements give you a sense of autonomy and can reveal punchlines (like "my [table] / the [table] / what even is property anyway?"). The "map" (i.e. the home screen from which you can go to the garden, workshop, etc.), actually felt like it detracted from the story - I kept exploring in the midgame, thinking that the locations would change in significant ways and be important to the plot. The locations rarely changed and were always incidental to the plot, which was really only advanced by sleeping, so exploration beyond the first day was almost always useless and could've been replaced with a framework that gave the player fewer choices, but wasted less of their time. (Or a system that let the player know which locations have changed.) So increased player (/ reader) choice isn't an unalloyed good and must be done thoughtfully.

## Analysis

> The final section of each report should bring your work in the lab into direct, critical conversation with our readings. In **_3-4 paragraphs_**, you should connect your lab observations to ideas from readings assigned _in the given lab unit_. This prose need not be as formal as a research paper, but it should demonstrate careful thought and preparation. You should integrate the readings explicitly, if possible through direct quotation. Use this writing to experiment with intellectual pairings you think might be generative to your larger thinking and help you prepare for the class’ Unessay projects. Think of your lab reports as an evolving research paper, and take them as seriously as one.

Like Twine, 17776 presents an interesting way of merging digital technology with the written word. In contrast with Twine, it's an explicitly linear narrative, which apparently forbids you from looking at the table of contents until you've completed the story at least once. The embedded videos enhance this linearity, making it harder than usual to skip around - harder even than on a codex. Pushing (or nudging) the audience to interact with a medium in a specific way can sometimes be thought of as an affordance as well as a limitation - the best example I have is the Java programming language, which nudges programmers to use object-oriented design principles (as opposed to Python, which lets programmers do pretty much whatever and is therefore especially prone to unstructured and tangled ("spaghetti") code). Whether or not this is really an affordance in 17776 isn't immediately clear to me, since I read things front-to-back as a rule - but I imagine it's usually a limitation, especially if someone who's read it before wants to find a specific chapter on a different computer (or on the same computer after clearing their cookies).

This limitation of 17776 mirrors some of the concerns Mod has over the Kindle's limitations. One could imagine that, if 17776 was a platform that hosted stories with the same format as 17776, the authors of the stories wouldn't want their table of contents to redirect to the first chapter of the book (and Craig Mod would be unhappy about it). The Kindle's choice to force authors to use one of only a few fonts and to put their tables of contents at the front of their books are definitely more limiting than the linearity of 17776 (only the latter would support artists' books). Twine has none of these limitations, and authors could theoretically do pretty much whatever they wanted to with Twine, including making a book that functioned like a normal codex! Does Twine then represent the future of e-books?

(While we're on this topic, Twine also reminded me of [God-Shaped Hole](https://zerohplovecraft.wordpress.com/2019/10/22/god-shaped-hole/) by Zero HP Lovecraft, a story (-like thing) with a forest of pages and a link structure that I'd need to map out to make sense of. The format was interesting in theory, but in practice it a) made it hard to gauge how long the piece was, and b) necessitated clicking "Open in new tab" on every link on each page to make sure I didn't miss anything. It didn't help that I wasn't a huge fan of the content.)

I think that while Twine is *theoretically* an improvement over pdfs, it'll continue to not see much use compared to more intuitive formats that people already know how to create (normal sequences of words, separated into a linear sequence of sections). Just as people have little incentive to switch from the Amazon Kindle due to its ebook semi-monopoly, the "normal sequences" format has a near-monopoly on books, and people won't switch over unless Twine performs significantly better (as it does for text-based games / visual novels / CYOAs). 