# Lab Report: MULTISENSORY READING

#### David Polansky

## Process Description

> You should begin with _1-2 paragraphs_ outlining precisely what you did in the lab activity. While much in these paragraphs will repeat between students, it is worthwhile to write out your experience, both to help you remember what you did and because your experiences—and what you take away or emphasize—will differ in subtle but important ways from your classmates. Most of our experiential activities will include specific outcomes. You might produce a specific material product, such as a letterpress printed sheet, or be asked to adapt code we went over together to answer a new question. The first task of any lab report, then, will be to demonstrate completion of these tasks.

In groups of threes, we examined five different pairs of 3D-printed blocks. The blocks were placed underneath type cases so that we couldn't see the type on the blocks. We touched the type, attempting to a) decipher it, and b) investigate the experience of reading by touch. (My group succeeded in deciphering two letters.) After we had touch-read each one, the blocks were revealed (that is, placed on top of the type cases so we could see them). Four of them turned out to be Boston Line Type or similar - so, 100% legible by sight. Two of these had illustraations, the nature of which were obtuse by touch. The one we thought was easiest to read was the Moon system, whose characters only sometimes look like English characters.

## Observations

> In the next section of each report, you should in **2-3 paragraphs** move from a literal description of what you did in the lab to a more conceptual set of observations. In brief, you want to home in on those aspects of the lab that raised questions or prompted new insights into the textual technology we investigated in the lab activity. What new ideas occurred to you while working? What surprised, delighted, or frustrated you?

Like everyone else, I was surprised by the illegibility of the text. I had assumed that, since I knew the shapes of English letters, I could figure out each letter without too much trouble (although much, much slower than someone fluent). But even blown up to twice the size, the identity of the letters evaded me. I often couldn't tell where one letter ended and another began, or tell the difference between 'o', 'a', and 'e'. It just felt like runes. I suspect it would've been easier if we'd had a "cheat sheet" that showed the particular shapes of the letters in Boston Line Type - then, maybe, it would've only been as difficult as e.g. deciphering the Dragon Prayer Book. Again, the Moon type was much more legible, such that if I did have a cheat sheet, reading wouldn't be difficult. I also expected one of the pairs of blocks to be in Braille - I'm interested as to how it compares to Moon.

I might've been even more surprised by the illegibility of the illustrations. All I had the ability to decipher was the fact that there *were* illustrations - or non-text information - on two of the pairs of block. (I thought one of them was a map.) I think one of the main reasons for this is that I couldn't take in the information all at once - I couldn't just lay my whole hand down and expect to get anything more detailed than "there are lines here, and no lines there"; but if I only use one finger, it's hard to see how small sections of the picture fit together. I didn't have peripheral vision or Gestalt principles to help me.

## Analysis

> The final section of each report should bring your work in the lab into direct, critical conversation with our readings. In **_3-4 paragraphs_**, you should connect your lab observations to ideas from readings assigned _in the given lab unit_. This prose need not be as formal as a research paper, but it should demonstrate careful thought and preparation. You should integrate the readings explicitly, if possible through direct quotation. Use this writing to experiment with intellectual pairings you think might be generative to your larger thinking and help you prepare for the class’ Unessay projects. Think of your lab reports as an evolving research paper, and take them as seriously as one.

"Touch this page" quotes Benjamin Bowen: “The books which the blind can read themselves, and especially the Bible, furnish benefits that can never be calculated. They enable them to pass usefully many an hour which would else be spent in ennui and listlessness, or in repining at a fate to which they ought to be resigned.” This is correct, and it also illuminates a reason why Boston Line Type didn't succeed - reading books is most often done in private. We all have our own copies of the assigned books, for example. In private contexts, the difference in "visibility" between Braille and Boston Line Type is completely negligible. In public contexts, too, reading Braille doesn't make *much* of a difference in visibility - a blind person would still be running their finger over the type in either case. Further, visibility must have been a much larger concern in Howe's time than it is today, as there's less stigma around being blind. "Six Design Rules on Disability" goes so far as to say that invisibility is "overrated" in general: tools don't always have to make their users "pass" as normal, and a focus on function rather than appearance is rather more interesting.

Speech, then, is the real "universal form of communication" that Howe was after. (Boston Line Type's difficulty to read by touch excludes it from consideration.) But speech can't be universal, either, because it excludes deaf people. What would a real universal medium look like? Perhaps if everyone had learned a Braille alternative (Moon in particular, although the Royal National Institute for the Blind has [unspecified reservations](https://www.rnib.org.uk/practical-help/reading/braille-and-moon-tactile-codes/moon) about its viability), then everyone could read and write using the same system. But one could also make the argument that the text-based Web constitutes a universal form of communication, since the blind can listen to web pages. And one could also argue that, since reading, watching, and listening all lose certain subtleties in the act of communcation, the only real universal medium will come in the form of direct brain-to-brain interfaces.

Probably the most interesting reading for this week wasn't actually on the list, but was linked to from 99% Invisible. ["Before Braille was King"](https://www.collectorsweekly.com/articles/before-braille-was-king/) illuminates the effects of economics on the War of the Dots (between Braille and New York Point). It wasn't simply that "Americans decided that they could design things better than those pretentious Europeans could", as 99% Invisible says. Rather, the motivation was economic: Braille has a "fixed-dot cell", meaning that a letter is always three dots high and two dots across; William Bell Wait thought that a variable-dot cell would be a more efficient use of space, enabling books for the blind to be manufactured more cheaply. (They are, after all, more expensive than books for the sighted.) Yet New York Point turned out to be more difficult to read *and* especially difficult to puncuate, resulting in most books written in New York Point to be unpunctuated! This illuminates design principles in general, I think: changes that are intuitive to make (especially changes that are intuitive to someone that the design isn't for) often backfire, and going without direct comparison of the designs (and/or A/B testing to iterate on your design) isn't advisable. Developers of these type systems could have done something similar to what we did in lab: ask a group of people unfamiliar with these systems to read text in them, and ask them what they observed. (It'd probably have to be a two-part process: first, reading without knowing what the symbols map to; and second, with aid of a cheat sheet.)

