# Lab Report: TYPE AND PRESS

#### David Polansky

## Process Description

> You should begin with _1-2 paragraphs_ outlining precisely what you did in the lab activity. While much in these paragraphs will repeat between students, it is worthwhile to write out your experience, both to help you remember what you did and because your experiences—and what you take away or emphasize—will differ in subtle but important ways from your classmates. Most of our experiential activities will include specific outcomes. You might produce a specific material product, such as a letterpress printed sheet, or be asked to adapt code we went over together to answer a new question. The first task of any lab report, then, will be to demonstrate completion of these tasks.

First, I arranged text onto a composing stick based on one of the poems my bot created in the previous lab. I was putting the text on upside-down at first (that is, upside-down relative to its proper orientation) but I asked the TA about it after the first line, so it was quickly corrected. I chose 18pt Century Expanded as my font, since it looked decent, not out-of-sorts, and was directly in front of me - but did substitute a few words ("There I am") with another 18pt font (Sans serif, but I don't know which one) in all-caps, in order to add emphasis. I completed 4 lines of text on the first day, stored it on the carrier, then completed the last 4 lines on the second day.

After the text was completed, the TA loaded it onto a forme along with 3 other texts. This was a delicate task - one had to make sure that the type was neither too loosely or too tightly packed (so it didn't fall off the forme), and that the 4 texts were arranged evenly. We loaded the forme onto the printing press, loaded the pages one at a time, and turned the wheel / operated the foot pedal to print. For me, it was easy to provide enough force to use the press, but I initially lacked precision (pushing down on the pedal before it started moving down; forgotting to turn the wheel first so the press started operating backwards). The finished pages were loaded onto the drying rack.

## Observations

> In the next section of each report, you should in **2-3 paragraphs** move from a literal description of what you did in the lab to a more conceptual set of observations. In brief, you want to home in on those aspects of the lab that raised questions or prompted new insights into the textual technology we investigated in the lab activity. What new ideas occurred to you while working? What surprised, delighted, or frustrated you?

What surprised me most was how difficult it was to compose the text, compared to how easy it was to print. I normally type around 5-6 characters per second (assuming I already know what I'm typing). Writing, or scribing, takes more time - around 2-3 characters per second. I'd be surprised if skilled compositors could output more than 1 character per second: picking up a piece of type and putting it on the composing stick takes much longer than writing a word - plus, there's the extra time that's devoted to putting in quads and spacers, which you don't have to do with either typing or writing. I wasn't a skilled compositor, so finding each piece of type took me *at least* a few seconds - and even more time for quads, which in my defense didn't seem to be organized that well in my font's case. The type also fell down in the carrier I was using on the second lab day, which took me a couple minutes to fix. In all, it took me around an hour and a half to compose 140 characters. Arranging type on the forme also looked time-intensive, but the actual printing was much faster than I'd expected, and would've been faster had we been printing continuously.

Putting in the quads and spacers wasn't just dead time, though. They illuminated some aesthetic decisions I had to make: how far apart do I want my words to be spaced? Is it okay if they're spaced inconsistently? (I had trouble finding the specific sized quad I was using for spaces.) How close together should the lines be? What kinds of margins do I want? Should I indent some lines, and if so, how far? Should I try to cram everything into 7 lines, instead of 8? These are all decisions I almost never think about when typing or writing, either because the computer makes these decisions for me (a tab is always X amount of space, depending on the word processor you're using and/or your Vim settings), or because I already have a format in mind that a) looks good and b) is easy to implement (such as the standard email format). Composing poetry in particular also means that I could conceivably go in many different directions with these decisions, and most of them would be defensible.

## Analysis

> The final section of each report should bring your work in the lab into direct, critical conversation with our readings. In **_3-4 paragraphs_**, you should connect your lab observations to ideas from readings assigned _in the given lab unit_. This prose need not be as formal as a research paper, but it should demonstrate careful thought and preparation. You should integrate the readings explicitly, if possible through direct quotation. Use this writing to experiment with intellectual pairings you think might be generative to your larger thinking and help you prepare for the class’ Unessay projects. Think of your lab reports as an evolving research paper, and take them as seriously as one.

Trithemius writes: 

> Brothers, no one should think or say "Why do I have to wear myself out writing by hand, when the art of printing has brought so many books to light, so that we can cheaply put together a great library?" Truly, whoever says this is trying to conceal his own sloth. (*In Praise of Scribes*, chapter 7)

If the choice is between scribing and doing nothing, then sloth really is being concealed. But if the choice is between scribing and printing, then Trithemius is incorrect in this assertion. Printing isn't a *lazy* form of copying, chiefly because of the labor intensive nature of compositing. In the time it takes for a few scribes to copy two or three texts, a few printers could make a few hundred copies of a single text, meaning that printing is less labor intensive per copy, but mmore labor intensiver per text. (And from a modern perspective, it's easy to see that this per-copy disparity would in no way lighten the printers' future workload, because the demand for books increases greatly the more books are produced.) Printers can even spend extra effort to make their copies more pristine or more evocative, such as the evocative nature of the punctuation of  David Walker's *Appeal*. 

Interestingly, while differentiation in skill and effort is most directly addressed by Emily Faithfull in "Women Compositors", she doesn't address any of the aesthetic decisions needed in printing. She says that a compositor that applies their mind to their work is much more *effective* than one who doesn't, but this effectiveness is expressed in terms of time-efficiency rather than well-aligned, aesthetically pleasing print. This omission could be for a few reasons: maybe Faithfull exerted considerable aesthetic control over the operation, or there was a fairly well-defined standard for print format (in which case, aesthetic errors would be viewed the same as typos, which Faithfull addresses); maybe there just wasn't much attention paid to aesthetics; maybe, as one practices composing more and more, the aesthetic decisions become second nature and thus unimportant.

It's also worth asking, if only briefly, if aesthetics really matter. Gayomali's article "How Typeface influences the way we read and think" seems to think that they do - although it's just talking about the choice of font, this seems like the same *kind of thing* as other typographic choices. From the article: "Kadavy argues that a "mismanagement of visual weight is the main issue that makes reading Comic Sans an unpleasant experience. Evenness of weight, or 'texture' is important to the legibility and readability of typography."" A lot of the aesthetic decisions I mentioned are aimed at increasing legibility and managing visual weight. A hardworking Renaissance printer would want to focus on this, as would a hardworking Medieval scribe want to focus on legibility and illumination.

