# Lab Report: ASSEMBLAGE

#### David Polansky

## Process Description

> You should begin with _1-2 paragraphs_ outlining precisely what you did in the lab activity. While much in these paragraphs will repeat between students, it is worthwhile to write out your experience, both to help you remember what you did and because your experiences—and what you take away or emphasize—will differ in subtle but important ways from your classmates. Most of our experiential activities will include specific outcomes. You might produce a specific material product, such as a letterpress printed sheet, or be asked to adapt code we went over together to answer a new question. The first task of any lab report, then, will be to demonstrate completion of these tasks.

On Monday, we looked at the zines in the Northeastern collection. On Wednesday, we created our own 8-page zines by folding an 8.5x11 into eighths, cutting along the middle fold, then arranging the paper [in such a way that it looks like a zine]. We were given scissors, magazines, tape, and glue with which to construct our zines. I started the zine by cutting out a solid blue cover, then gluing it to the front and back page. Then, I found some words and pictures to cut out, and filled in the words I couldn't find with writing in pen.

## Observations

> In the next section of each report, you should in **2-3 paragraphs** move from a literal description of what you did in the lab to a more conceptual set of observations. In brief, you want to home in on those aspects of the lab that raised questions or prompted new insights into the textual technology we investigated in the lab activity. What new ideas occurred to you while working? What surprised, delighted, or frustrated you?

It was interesting to compare my creative process with everyone else's. I spent the first couple minutes looking at the cover of Spectrum magazine, trying to see if it anagrammed into anything interesting. It did: "TRUMP" and "SEC". I didn't want to make my zine about Trump (or, you know, the SEC) because I felt like I couldn't escape him in the news: that was the impetus for making the zine title "things you thought you could escape". From then on, I pretty much knew what I was doing. Other people started looking for interesting images in the magazines and putting them in ad-hoc; other people had set out to make a zine about an aspect of their life and stuck with it. But casual zine-making supports all of these: thesis-driven creation, bottom-up "this looks cool" creation, and stuff in between.

I finished the zine in less than 1.5 hours. Other people finished their first zine and got halfway done with their next one. It's amazing to me how few materials - paper, scissors, and glue - and how little time it takes to create a zine. They were only 8 small pages each, but sometimes 8 pages is all one needs to express or explore an idea. It was also a lot more fun than I expected. I don't often get to experience the joy of creation, and the zine format is an easy way to facilitate that. You don't even technically have to come up with your own ideas - you could, as some people did, just copy and paste things that look cool.

## Analysis

> The final section of each report should bring your work in the lab into direct, critical conversation with our readings. In **_3-4 paragraphs_**, you should connect your lab observations to ideas from readings assigned _in the given lab unit_. This prose need not be as formal as a research paper, but it should demonstrate careful thought and preparation. You should integrate the readings explicitly, if possible through direct quotation. Use this writing to experiment with intellectual pairings you think might be generative to your larger thinking and help you prepare for the class’ Unessay projects. Think of your lab reports as an evolving research paper, and take them as seriously as one.

From *Zine*, page 13: 
> "Once I started doing the ’zine, I knew I was on to something. I was happy here in my room— drawing a cartoon about summer camp, writing about my trip to Knoxville, choosing cheesy illustrations from clip-art collections. It reminded me of when I was a little kid, eight or nine, and I used to make my own books. I had rediscovered the sheer delight of creating something. How had I forgotten that this— this absorbed, tongue-between-the-teeth, little-girl feeling— was the essence of art?" 

To some extent, it doesn't *matter* whether you're doing a top-down or bottom-up creation. The goal of zine-making isn't to make the socially-accepted "best" work of art, the Great American Novel that Pagan was trying to write at Johns Hopkins. The goal is to create cool stuff and to have fun doing it. This should maybe be the goal of *all* art, but the zine's format is especially friendly to casual works - because the zine's construction is already casual, and the content is often cut-and-pasted.

Speaking of cut-and-paste - when I was brainstorming things to make the zine about, I noticed that a zine was the perfect place to put blackout poetry. (I was surprised nobody else did it!) We could either do "crossout" or "cutout" blackout poems - or, if we were really fancy, "covered up" or "visual". It fits with what people were already trying to do with their zines, which was to repurpose words and images from the magazines to support their own artist visions. 

The cut-and-pastedness contrasts itself with the "crystal goblet" that Borsuk cited: "a transparent vessel through which we access the information we want. This invisibility may be marketed as utility, but it is not necessarily in our best interest... [it] limits our ability to understand and change their inner workings." Zines are almost exactly the opposite of this goblet. The simplicity of the physical construction makes it less invisible, and the fact that the images were cut-and-pasted draws attention towards which sources they were retrieved from (as well as the difference between the original context and the new context). And the fact that zines aren't expected to be transparent vessels frees the authors from the often-restrictive work of making them appear transparent.

Finally, I'd like to note the variety of the purposes we brought to our zine construction. Some of us made it about our own lives, some of us were trying to contruct a specific vision, while others were only trying to explore the format. This reflects the Zine Librarians' Code of Ethics, which cites the multiplicity of purposes that make decisions about zine archiving so difficult to make.