# Reading Prep: PRESS

#### David Polansky

## Questions or Observations

1. Faithfull's arguments in favor of gender equality in the workforce are obvious to people in 2019. I do wonder how radical her remarks were seen as [in 1861], and what the gender ratios in the printing industry looked like in Britain. What I find most interesting are her comments about apprenticeship as an antidote to laziness: is there really a formative period for work ethic? And how much of this was influenced by society's expectations for landed gentry (e.g. that they were superior to the working class because of their leisure).
2. One of novelist Elmore Leonard's rules for writing is to limit one's usage of exclamation marks: "You are allowed no more than two or three per 100,000 words of prose. If you have the knack of playing with exclaimers the way Tom Wolfe does, you can throw them in by the handful." This draws from his broader ethos of writing: to "remain invisible", to "not distract the reader with obvious writing." Walker takes the opposite approach. He wants his voice to be extremely visible - to be read aloud, even - so he uses exclamation marks by the bucketful. There are a few more elements to this: one, mentioned by the reading, is that various numbers of exclamation marks can show various degrees of emphasis. But I think the main reason we use '!!!' so much less than Walker is that we're (overly?) concerned about sounding balanced, measured, and calm - which is itself related to the lack of '!!!' in more formal genres, such as scientific papers.
3. I disagree with Price's characterizations of Amazon's e-book business model on page 59. First, it doesn't really depend upon its customers' failure to read the fine print: many people who read the fine print, including me, still buy into the system. This is not only because of the other affordances of the medium, but also because the likelihood that Amazon will *take away* books from its customers is quite low. Second, while this licensing *is* due to the business model, the business model is heavily informed by the technology. Without licensing, Amazon couldn't legally prevent its books from being shared to everyone with an Internet connection for little to no cost. (This isn't possible with codices.) To blame licensing on the business model elides this point.

