# Reading Prep: ASSEMBLAGE

#### David Polansky

## Questions or Observations

1. Only one of the examples of erasure poetry - crossout - actually exposes the words that were redacted. Whether or not redaction does this changes the way it functions: when it shows the words that were redacted, it can highlight the interplay between the text and the poem (see the linked manifesto's points 4 and 5); whereas if it doesn't show the redacted words, it appears almost the same as a poem that simply has strange spacing, and erasure is only used because it's a good way to generate poetry that can stand on its own. (This is especially true with retyped poems, some of which don't even have that spacing.)
2. There's a note in the margin on page 231: "May be why I am so drawn to print/digital hybrids - My father patented that name [Bookman] in 1988." The note looks handwritten, but it's printed. It's also the only one in the book. I think it's intentional: the personal subject matter differentiates it from the more objective nature of the rest of the Book, yet it still seems like a good idea to leave in. (Kind of the opposite of the footnotes in Lovelace and Babbage, which contrast the comic by being objective / historical.) This is partially because it's fun to know, and partially because the inclusion of the footnote highlights what the book is talking about: the ways that the interface highlights itself or hides itself. This footnote blurs the distinction between print and handwriting, and possibly between print and digital (it was probably a digital document before it was printed).
3. The main point in the Zine Librarians Code of Ethics is that everything depends on context: whether the author wants their work to be archived, how they want it to be treated, purchased, reproduced and quoted, etc. In normal publishing, this isn't the policy: there's a standard [or two or three] which almost all modern published books conform to. I think this is largely due to book publishers (who have the rights to the book and are motivated by profit) and book producers (which have templates for book production, so books are very similar). When individuals are the publishers and producers, motives, methods of production, etc. are practically limitless - as with Back to Pagan, where the author's primary motives were to "make her life a work of art", to meet people, and to create a community (and one edition had stickers on the back). How would a library deal with that? They'd ideally ask the author.

"A good interface, according to human-centered design principles, is like Warde's crystal goblet: a transparent vessel through which we access the information we want. This invisibility may be marketed as utility, but it is not necessarily in our best interest... [it] limits our ability to understand and change their inner workings."

"We will also consider contemporary approaches to digital reading that, rather than offering up a crystal goblet, invite us to trace our finger along text's rim and make it sing: drawing attention to the interface to explore and exploit the affordances of the digital." (203)
