# Reading Prep: CORPUS

#### David Polansky

## Questions or Observations

1. We don't live in an era where written poetry is generally popular - and it was interesting for me to see the differences between popular, or viral, 19th century poetry, and the most popular poetry today. The three viral poems specifically identified ("Mortality", "Beautiful Snow", and "The Children") all use trisyllables, and they all have simple, consistent, quick rhythms that make them "catchy". They also have simple rhyme schemes - either ABAB or AABB - and reasonably simple themes. (I'm tempted to say that they're like Dr. Seuss for adults, but that sounds like I'm denigrating them.) Is this a real difference between the most popular poems from then and now, or am I generalizing from too few examples? And if it's a real difference, what explains that difference? (Has demand for simple poetry been replaced by demand for other easy-to-consume media?)
2. Are there common frequencies of cycles of virality? Is the frequency higher on the Internet than in 19th century newspapers? (If it's lower, we probably wouldn't be able to detect it...)
3. Saying that the gender binary is "no less constructed" than the Facebook advertising platform or the Golden Gate Bridge elides a few important distinctions. (Which they do touch on later in the piece, but they don't relate it back to the platform/bridge comparison, and my take is also a bit different.) First, platforms and bridges are explicitly constructed, whereas classification systems often arise implicitly, through cultural evolution and generalization from examples. The first two are known knowns, while the third is often an unknown known - something someone believes, that structures the way they think about the world, but that they don't realize that they believe. Second, while physical and virtual structures can have a huge variety of primary aims, conceptual structures (almost) all have one primary aim: to ease cognitive load and to make predictions about the world. Our choice of a conceptual structure is based on which predictions we want to make, and on how accurate we want those predictions to be. To a first approximation, a gender binary is useful because we can use it to make a wide range of predictions somewhat accurately, and a few predictions with around 99% accuracy. To a second approximation, around 1% of people either don't fit super-cleanly into the gender binary or fall outside of it together, so expanding the binary will reduce cognitive load and increase prediction accuracy when thinking about that 1% - but the expansion should still be optimized to reduce cognitive load. (Consider: a conceptual system of gender with 1 gender for every person would have 100% predictive accuracy, yet the cognitive load would be untenable.) 
4. Further nitpicks of D'Ignazio and Klein (you don't have to read this): 

	4a. Women as "inferior men" is still effectively a gender binary, right?
	
	4b. r.e. race: wasn't geographic origin inferred from physical characteristics, including skin color?
	
	4c. Just because someone or something falls outside of a classification system, doesn't necessarily mean that the system is insufficient. When detecting potential terrorists from the general population, the goal isn't to have low specificity, it's to have high sensitivity - so false negatives for Mikey and non-binary people aren't a huge problem. (Just to be clear, I'm talking about Stage 1 of the process - if patting them down still resulted in a false negative, that would be a much bigger issue.)

	4d. If an advertiser orders a list of users sorted by gender, *of course* everyone of one gender is going to come first! *That's how sorting works!* The fault lies not with the database having a field for gender, but on the person that's writing the query! It's *trivially easy* to write a query that fetches equal numbers of men and women. Or one that returns women above men, for that matter.
	
	4e. For the Stanford study: by "somewhere in the middle", they actually mean "not "very" masculine / feminine". Around 85% of males-at-birth identified as more masculine than feminine, and vice versa. Also consider that Mechanical Turk users skew younger and more educated than the general population, and more likely to identify as genderqueer.