# Reading Prep: SENSATION

#### David Polansky

## Questions or Observations

1. It's interesting how "the End of Books" consists both of entirely correct predictions and wildly incorrect predictions. Whittemore was correct about America's dominance and Africa's relative non-eminence, but seemingly incorrect about Oceanica. Pollock's chemical sustenance hasn't transpired - except for meal replacements like Mealsquares and Soylent. Pool's predictions, of course, turned out to be correct. And the narrator anticipated some parts of audiobooks - the narrators, the portability - but incorrect about its dominance over text and the technology required to make them work. The correct predictions are especially interesting, as I don't think Uzanne was being entirely serious.
2. I think Hendren overstates her claim by saying, "The bell curve is the source of all talk about how individuals measure up relative to others." *All* talk? Disabilty was visible *and* undesirable long before the Gaussian distribution was discovered in the 1830s, and people *did* compare themselves to others. The *concepts* of disability and normality was coined in the 1830s, but it didn't become the ultimate source of all talk about, etc. - it seems like it introduced the notion of "average" or "above average", but not "better than" or "worse than". If anything, it seems like it helped propagate a more achievable standard: "above average" rather than "the best". And the "normalcy" / "disability" standard has benefits: if someone is below a certain ability threshold, then society recognizes its duty to support them and make accomodations.
3. I'm intrigued as to how often "universal design" succeeds vs. fails. In most cases, I don't think a choice between integration and segregation (for lack of a better word) has to be made. (See e.g. glasses, elevators, crutches, and other technology that doesn't separate the abled and disabled, except visually.) But when a universal system wouldn't work *quite* as well as a segregated system, the issue becomes thorny, and you have to quantify *how much* better the segregated system is, and how much of a cost segregation would impose. I don't think Howe was a villain, I just think he made the wrong tradeoff.